CONTRACT OF PURCHASE AND SALE

This purchase ande sale agreement is entered into this day of XXX 20,XXX

Mr. XXX of legal age XXX, holder Identify Card XXX and resident in XXX and Mrs. XXX of legal age XXX, holder of Identify Card XXX and resident in XXX (the “Sellers”)
 AND
Mr. XXX of legal age XXX, holder Identify Card XXX and resident in XXX and Mrs. XXX of legal age XXX, holder of Identify Card XXX and resident in XXX (the “Purchasers”)


Mr./Ms. XXX [insert full name, address and tax number] ("the Vendor”), appoint Mr./Ms. XXX [insert full name, address, fiscal number and professional qualification, if necessary] ("the Agent"), subject to and in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement, to act as his/her XXX [exclusive or non- exclusive] Agent in the marketing and sale of the real estate property located in/at
XXX	[insert	address	town	and	country]	whose information is provided in Annex 1 (Property Information Form) of this Agreement.



Mr./Ms.	[insert  full name,  address  and fiscal  tax number]
("the Vendor”), appoint	[insert  company  legal name] whose registered office
is  at  XXX  [address,  city  and  country]  and  registration/tax  number  is
XXX,  represented  by XXX  [surname  and first
name, position] ("the Agent”), subject to and in accordance with the terms and conditions of this  Agreement, to  act as  his/her  XXX  [exclusive  or  non-exclusive] Agent  in   the
marketing   and   sale   of   the   real   estate   property   located   in/at XXX
XXX [insert address, town and country] whose
information is provided in Annex 1 (Property Information Form) of this Agreement.


1. Representations
The Seller represents and warrants that the Property is free and clear of any liens, charged, encumbrances or rights of others which will not be satisfied out of the sales proceeds. If the representations of the Seller are untrue upon the Closing Date, the Purchaser may terminate any future agreement without  penalty.



2.	VALIDITY PERIOD OF THE AGREEMENT

This Agreement shall take effect on XXX [Day/Month/Year] and expire
XXX [Day/Month/Year], both days inclusive.



This Agreement shall commence on XXX [Day/Month/Year] and shall have a term of	[1, 3, 6, 9, 12] months.


3.	DUTIES OF THE AGENT

In addition to the duties incumbent on the Agent under this Agreement, the Agent shall:

(a)	Obtain all the information necessary for the sale of the Property.
(b)	Market the Property on behalf of the Vendor.
(c)	Arrange for purchasers to inspect the Property.
(d)	Conduct negotiations and submit all offers in relation to the Property to the Vendor.
(e)	Assist the Vendor in entering into a binding agreement for sale and purchase with a Purchaser.


4.	PRICE OF THE PROPERTY

The price of the property shall be	[insert amount and currency].

This price may only be varied with written instructions of the Vendor and such instructions shall become part of this Agreement.

The Vendor does not confer upon the Agent, by virtue of this Clause, the right to accept an offer on behalf of the Vendor. The price specified is for advertising and marketing of the property purposes only.


5.	COMMISSION

if during the Validity Period of the Agreement the Vendor through the Agent enters into a binding Contract for sale and purchase of the Property, then the Vendor is liable to pay the Agent a commission of XXX % [insert percentage, usually between 1% and 5%] of the transacted price of the Property (taxes excluded).

The commission shall be paid:

Alternative A. Upon the signing of the sale and purchase contract.

Alternative B. Upon completion of the Property transaction as specified in the contract for sale and purchase.
XXX





Notices Clause

Sometimes it may happen that the official address of the Parties which appear at the beginning of the contract is different from which is to be used for communications between the Parties during the terms of the contract. In this case, the user should include at the end of the contract a Notices Clause.

Example of Notices Clause:

Notices. - In order to comply with their contractual obligations, the Parties establish the following address for the provision of notices related to this contract:

-	Party 1	[insert full address].
-	Party 2	[insert full address].


ANNEXES

The contracts incorporate some Annexes, each of them, referenced to the corresponding Clause. Annexes are drafted in commonly used formats, although the user must adapt these formats and the text inserted in them to each particular situation.


GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS

The Parties must sign all pages of the contract, including Annexes, so they are also valid. It is better to use ball point or pen (not pencil) in a color other than black (e.g.: blue); this makes it easier to distinguish an original document from a photocopy.

It is preferable (although no mandatory) to express sums of money and percentages in words and figures. Of course, the words and figures for a given amount must match exactly. You also must insert the currency in which the amounts are expressed. It is advisable to use the rules establish by ISO that name each currency by three capital letters (EUR for euro, USD for dollar, GBP for sterling pound, JPY for Japanese yen, etc. - you can get the acronyms of every currency in the website www.oanda.com).

Once you have chosen the best alternatives of each clause and have completed the blank spaces you should revise the whole contract to remove remaining paragraphs and correct any errors.
 
Real Estate Disclosure
The Seller does not know of any material facts that would affect the value of the Property, except those observable by the Purchaser  or know to the Seller and stated in this Contract. 


Purchaser XXX                                                                        
Seller XXX
