LOUISIANA REAL ESTATE LICENSE LAW
(As amended through the 2016 Regular Session)
This information is provided as a courtesy to real estate licensees and the general viewing public. To
view the codified, or official, publication of the Louisiana Real Estate License Law, or any other state law,
visit the web portal of the Louisiana State Legislature at www.legis.state.la.us.
§1430. Short title
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Louisiana Real Estate License Law."
Added by Acts 1983, No. 268, §1.
§1431. Definitions
As used in this Chapter the following words have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
(1) "Active licensee" means any currently licensed person whose license has not been
transferred to inactive status and who is authorized to act in the capacity of a real estate broker
or salesperson as provided for in this Chapter.
(2) "Agent" means a licensee acting under the provisions of this Chapter in a real estate
transaction.

(3) "Associate broker" means a person who holds a broker's license and who is exclusively
affiliated with and sponsored by another licensed real estate broker to participate in any
activity described in this Section.

(4) "Broker" or "real estate broker" means a licensed real estate broker performing activities as
an individual real estate broker, a sponsoring broker or designated qualifying broker, or a
corporation, partnership, or limited liability company which has been granted a real estate
license through a designated qualifying broker.

(5) "Buyer" means the transferee in a real estate transaction, and includes a person who
executes an offer to purchase or lease real estate from a seller, whether alone or through an
agent, or who seeks the services of an agent with the object of entering into a real estate
transaction. "Buyer" includes a lessee.

(6) "Buyer's agent" means a licensee who is employed by and represents only the buyer in a
real estate transaction, regardless of whether such agent's compensation is paid by the buyer
directly or by the seller through a commission split with the listing agent.
 
(7) "Client" means one who engages the professional advice and services of a licensee as his
agent and whose interests are protected by the specific duties and loyalties imposed by that
relationship.

(8) "Commingling" means putting personal funds and funds belonging to other persons in one
mass or mixing the funds together so they cannot be identified or differentiated.

(9) "Commission" means the Louisiana Real Estate Commission.

(10) "Dealing in options" means a person, firm, partnership, limited liability company,
association, or corporation directly or indirectly taking, obtaining, or using an option to
purchase, exchange, rent, or lease real property or any interest therein with the intent or for
the purpose of buying, selling, exchanging, renting, or leasing said real property or interests
therein to another or others, whether or not said option is in his name and whether or not title
to said property passes through the name of said person, firm, partnership, limited liability
company, association, or corporation in connection with the purchase, sale, exchange, rental,
or lease of such real property in interest.

(11) "Franchise agreement" means an agreement whereby one party, the franchisor, authorizes
a real estate broker, the franchisee, to use registered trademarks or other advertising tools to
create a common identity among several brokers nationally or regionally for marketing
purposes.

(12) "Inactive licensee" means any currently licensed person whose license has been
transferred to inactive status and who is not authorized to act in the capacity of a real estate
broker or salesperson as provided for in this Chapter.

(13) "Individual real estate broker" means an individual person licensed as a real estate broker
and does not mean a licensed corporation, limited liability company, or partnership licensed as
a real estate broker.

(14) "Licensee" means any person who has been issued a license by the commission to
participate in any activity described in this Section.

(15) "Listing agent" means a licensee who has obtained a listing of real estate to act as an agent
for compensation.

(16) "Listing agreement" means a written document signed by all owners of real estate or their
authorized attorney in fact authorizing a broker to offer or advertise real estate described in
such document for sale or lease on specified terms for a defined period of time. A listing
agreement shall only be valid if signed by all owners or their authorized attorney in fact.
 
(17) "Mold" means any form of multicellular fungi that live on plant or animal matter and in
indoor or outdoor environments. Types of mold often found in water-damaged building
materials include but are not limited to cladosporium, penicillium, alternaria, aspergillus,
fuarim, trichoderma, memnoniella, mucor, and strachybotrys chartarum.

(18) "Net listing agreement" means a listing agreement that authorizes a broker to take as his
commission the difference between the higher sale price at which the real estate property is
sold and the stipulated net price agreed upon to be received by the seller.

(19) Repealed by Acts 1995, No. 1207, §2.

(20) "Property management" means the marketing, leasing, or overall management of real
property for others for a fee, commission, compensation, or other valuable consideration.

(21) "Property manager" means one who, for a fee, commission, or other valuable
consideration, manages real estate, including the collection of rents, supervision of property
maintenance, and accounting for fees received for another.

(22) "Qualifying broker" means the sponsoring broker for a licensed corporation, limited liability
company, or partnership and is the individual real estate broker designated by a licensed
corporation, limited liability company, or partnership, by resolution, as its representative in all
matters relating to its real estate business activities in Louisiana and in administrative and
regulatory matters before the commission.

(23) "Real estate" shall mean and include condominiums and leaseholds, as well as any other
interest in land, with the exceptions of oil, gas and other minerals and whether the real estate
is situated in this state or elsewhere.

(24) "Real estate activity" means any activity relating to any portion of a real estate transaction
performed for another by any person, partnership, limited liability company, association, or
corporation, foreign or domestic, whether pursuant to a power of attorney or otherwise, who
for a fee, commission, or other valuable consideration or with the intention, in the expectation,
or upon the promise of receiving or collecting a fee, commission, or other valuable
consideration:

(a) Sells, exchanges, purchases, manages, rents, or leases or negotiates the sale, exchange,
purchase, rental, or leasing of real estate.

(b) Offers or attempts or agrees to negotiate the sale, exchange, purchase, management,
rental, or leasing of real estate.

(c) Lists or offers or attempts or agrees to list for sale or lease any real estate or the
improvement thereon.
(d) Buys or offers to buy, sells or offers to sell, or otherwise deals in options on real estate or
the improvements thereon.

(e) Advertises or holds himself, itself, or themselves out as engaged in the business of selling,
exchanging, purchasing, managing, renting, or leasing real estate.

(f) Assists or directs in the procuring of prospects or the negotiation or closing of any
transaction, other than mortgage financing, which results or is calculated to result in the sale,
exchange, managing, leasing, or renting of any real estate, other than a provider of information,
ideas, and materials to guide homeowners in the sale of their own property.

(g) Is engaged in the business of charging an advance fee or contracting for collection of a fee in
connection with any contract whereby he undertakes primarily to promote the sale, exchange,
purchase, rental, or leasing of real estate through its listing in a publication issued primarily for
such purpose, or for referral of information concerning such real estate to brokers, or both.

(h)(i) Sells or attempts to sell or offers or attempts to negotiate the sale of any business whose
assets include real estate or leases of real estate.

(ii) Lists or offers or attempts or agrees to list for sale any business whose assets include real
estate or leases of real estate.

(25) "Real estate continuing education vendor" means any school, place, individual, or
institution certified by the Louisiana Real Estate Commission which offers courses or seminars
in real estate and related subjects to fulfill continuing education requirements for license or
certificate renewal purposes.

(26) "Real estate salesperson" means a person, other than an associate broker, sponsored by a
licensed real estate broker to participate in any activity described in this Section.

(27) "Real estate school" includes any place or institution certified by the commission which is
open to the public for the instruction or training of individuals to engage in the selling of real
estate.

(28) "Real estate transaction" means the selling, offering for sale, buying, offering to buy,
soliciting for prospective purchasers, managing, offering to manage, leasing, offering to lease,
renting, or offering to rent any real estate or improvements thereon, or any business or other
entity whose assets include real estate or leases of real estate.

(29) "Seller" means the transferor in a real estate transaction, and includes an owner who lists
real estate with an agent, whether or not a transfer results, or who receives an offer to
purchase or lease real estate property of which he is the owner from an agent on behalf of
another. "Seller" includes a lessor.
(30) "Sponsoring broker" means any individual real estate broker who sponsors associate
brokers or real estate salespersons who participate in any activity described in this Section.

(31) "Subagent" means a licensee, other than a listing agent or a buyer's agent, who acts in
cooperation with a listing agent in a real estate transaction.

(32) "Timeshare developer" means an individual, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation, or other legal entity, or the successor or assignee thereof, who creates a timeshare
plan or who is in the business of making sales of timeshare interests which it owns or purports
to own.

(33) "Timeshare interest salesperson" means a person who directly sells or offers to sell any
timeshare interest.

(34) "Timeshare registrant" means timeshare interest salespersons or timeshare developers
registered by the commission.

Acts 1978, No. 514, §1; Acts 1979, No. 404, §1; Acts 1981, No. 309, §1; Acts 1983, No. 381, §1;
Acts 1983, No. 380, §1; Acts 1983, No. 270, §1; Acts 1983, No. 552, §2; Acts 1986, No. 841, §1;
Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 1990, No. 893, §1; Acts 1991, No. 354, §1, eff. Jan.
1, 1992; Acts 1995, No. 1207, §§1, 2; Acts 1997, No. 845, §1; Acts 2003, No. 1123, §1, eff. July 2,
2003; Acts 2006, No. 351, §1; Acts 2015, No. 81, §1.
§1432. Louisiana Real Estate Commission; qualifications; terms of office
A. The Louisiana Real Estate Commission is hereby created within the office of the governor.
The commission shall consist of eleven members appointed by the governor. One member
shall be appointed from each of the seven supreme court districts. Two members shall be
appointed at large. Two members shall be appointed from the following districts: one
appointee from either the Fourth Congressional District or the Fifth Congressional District and
one appointee from either the First, Second, Third, or Sixth Congressional District. Each
appointment by the governor shall be submitted to the Senate for confirmation.
B. Each appointment to the commission shall be for a six-year term. No commissioner shall
serve more than one six-year term.
C. Members of the commission shall be citizens and qualified electors of this state. Each
member shall have actively engaged in the real estate business as a broker for at least five years
next preceding the date of appointment.
D. A vacancy caused by any reason except the expiration of the term shall be filled by
appointment by the governor for the remainder of the unexpired term.
E. The governor may remove any member of the commission for cause.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1. Amended by Acts 1980, No. 730, §1, eff. July 29, 1980; Acts 1989,
No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 1991, No. 436, §1; Acts 2001, No. 8, §12, eff. July 1, 2001;
Acts 2005, No. 78, §1; Acts 2009, No. 104, §1; Acts 2012, No. 803, §9.
§1433. Officers; quorum; meetings; compensation
A. The commission shall elect from its members a chairman and a secretary and shall select a
vice chairman to serve in the absence of the chairman.

B.(1) Six members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for all business. The commission
shall meet quarterly or more often if necessary.

(2) The commission shall be limited to two regularly scheduled meetings per month. Additional
meetings may be called upon application of three members.

C. Members of the commission shall be compensated at a rate of not more than fifty dollars a
day for each meeting or for attending to commission business, however, a member attending
two meetings on the same day shall not be compensated for more than one meeting on that
day. Members shall also be reimbursed for their actual expenses covering travel, meals, lodging
and other incidental expenses incurred while attending commission meetings or attending to
commission business.

Acts 1978, No. 514, §1; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 2016, No. 533, §1.
§1434. Domicile
The domicile of the commission shall be in the city of Baton Rouge.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1.
§1435. Powers of the commission
A. The commission shall have the full power and authority to:

(1) Regulate the issuance of real estate licenses, registrations, and certificates.

(2) Censure licensees, registrants, and certificate holders.

(3) Suspend or revoke licenses, registrations, and certificates.
 
(4) Impose additional continuing education requirements on licensees, registrants, or certificate
holders.

(5) Purchase, acquire, develop, expand, sell, lease, maintain, mortgage, borrow funds, or
otherwise contract with respect to immovable property and improvements thereon as it may
deem necessary or appropriate to accomplish the provisions of this Chapter. Additionally, the
commission shall have the authority to borrow funds with the approval of the State Bond
Commission and to expend funds of the commission for the acquisition of immovable property
and improvements thereon. In the event that the commission sells immovable property and
improvements thereon, the revenue derived from the sale shall be retained by the commission
and shall not be subject to reversion to the state general fund.

B. The commission shall adopt a seal by which it shall authenticate its proceedings.

C. The commission may:

(1) Adopt all necessary rules and bylaws for the administration and enforcement of this
Chapter.

(2) Require any satisfactory proof it may desire as to the honesty, truthfulness, reputation, and
knowledge of any applicant or of any of the officers or members of such applicant, if applicable,
to any of the following:

(a) Real estate broker license.

(b) Real estate salesperson license.

(c) Real estate school or vendor certification.

(d) Timeshare interest salesperson registration.

(e) Real estate instructor approval or certification.

(3) Repealed by Acts 2016, No. 533, §2.

D. In addition to its general powers, as provided by way of extension and not of limitation, the
commission may require all licensees, registrants, and certificate holders to keep records, as
specified in this Chapter. The commission is authorized to inspect such records at the offices of
the licensees, registrants, and certificate holders, by its duly authorized representatives
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., with Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays
excluded, and to subpoena any of the records.
 
E. The commission shall have the right to subpoena any licensee, registrant, certificate holder,
or witness for the purpose of holding any hearing or in furtherance of an authorized
investigation. Failure by a licensee or registrant to comply with a subpoena or subpoena duces
tecum shall be punishable by the commission as pursuant to R.S. 37:1455.

F. The commission shall have the right to require all real estate licensees and registered
timeshare developers to deposit all monies or things of value received on behalf of clients in a
separate banking account or accounts in a legally chartered financial institution. The monies so
received are not to be commingled with the personal funds of such licensees or registrants.

G. The commission shall appoint an executive director, who shall have such powers, authority,
and responsibilities as the commission shall delegate. The commission shall establish the salary
of the executive director, and may remove the executive director for cause.

H. The commission may adopt rules, regulations, and procedures in accordance with the
Administrative Procedure Act, by which a determination may be made as to whom a disputed
escrow deposit shall be released.

Acts 1978, No. 514, §1. Amended by Acts 1980, No. 387, §1; Acts 1983, No. 552, §2; Acts 1984,
No. 943, §2, eff. July 20, 1984; Acts 1986, No. 837, §1; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990;
Acts 1991, No. 642, §1; Acts 1995, No. 1207, §1; Acts 1999, No. 628, §1; Acts 2005, No. 78, §1;
Acts 2016, No. 533, §§1, 2.
§1436. Licensing and registration required
A. Licenses issued by the commission shall be classed as active and inactive.

B. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, limited liability company, association, or
corporation, foreign or domestic, whether pursuant to a power of attorney or otherwise, for a
fee, commission, or other valuable consideration, or with the intention, in the expectation, or
upon the promise of receiving or collecting a fee, commission or other valuable consideration,
to engage in any real estate activity relating to any portion of a real estate transaction
performed for another, unless exempted, as specified herein.

C. It shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or
other legal entity, or the successor or assignee thereof, to create a timeshare plan, or to make
sales of timeshare interests, which it owns or purports to own or for another, without first
obtaining a registration, as provided in this Chapter, unless exempted, as specified therein.

D. Any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other legal entity that,
directly or indirectly for another, with the intention or upon the promise of receiving any
valuable consideration, offers, attempts, or agrees to perform, or performs any single act
described herein, whether as a part of a transaction, or as an entire transaction, shall be 
deemed a licensee or registrant within the meaning of this Chapter. The commission of a single
act by such a person or entity required to be licensed or registered under this Chapter and not
so licensed or registered shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this Chapter.

Acts 1978, No. 514, §1; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 1997, No. 845, §1; Acts
2016, No. 533, §1.
§1437. Application for license
A. Any person, partnership, limited liability company, association, or corporation, or other legal
entity desiring to conduct real estate activity in this state, shall file an application for a license
with the commission. The application shall be in such form and detail as the commission shall
prescribe, setting forth the following:

(1) The name and address of the applicant and the name under which the applicant intends to
conduct business.

(2) The place or places, including the city or village with the street and street number, if any,
where the business is to be conducted.

(3) Such other information as the commission shall require.

B. Licenses shall be granted only to persons, partnerships, limited liability companies,
associations, corporations, or other legal entities that bear a good reputation for honesty,
trustworthiness, integrity, and competence to transact the real estate activities defined in this
Chapter, in such a manner as to safeguard the interest of the public, and only after satisfactory
proof of such qualifications has been presented to the commission.

(1) When an applicant has been convicted of forgery, embezzlement, obtaining money under
false pretenses, larceny, extortion, conspiracy to defraud, or theft, or has been convicted of a
felony or a crime involving moral turpitude in any court of competent jurisdiction, such
untrustworthiness of the applicant, and the conviction, may in itself be sufficient grounds for
refusal of a license.

(2) When an applicant has made a false statement of material fact on his application, such false
statement may in itself be sufficient grounds for refusal of a license.

(3) Grounds for suspension or revocation of a real estate license in Louisiana or any other
jurisdiction, or the previous suspension or revocation, of a real estate license in Louisiana or any
other jurisdiction shall also be grounds for refusal to grant a license.

C. No individual real estate broker or salesperson's license shall be issued to any person who
has not attained the age of eighteen years. No individual real estate broker or salesperson's 
license shall be issued to any person who is not a high school graduate or the holder of a
certificate of high school equivalency.

(1)(a) All applicants for an initial individual real estate broker license shall have first been
licensed for four years, with two of the four years occurring immediately preceding submission
of a broker license application, and shall show evidence satisfactory to the commission that
they have satisfactorily completed at least one hundred fifty hours of instruction, or its
equivalent, in real estate courses approved by the commission. Satisfactory completion
includes passage of an examination on course contents.

(b) At least thirty hours of the broker educational requirement shall be obtained in coursework
emphasizing broker responsibilities.

(c) Each person obtaining an initial real estate broker's license shall complete forty-five postlicense education hours within one hundred eighty days after the initial license date. Such hours
shall be in subjects required by the commission including but not limited to laws, rules and
regulations changes, finance, and the handling of funds. Post-license education hours may be
used in the year completed to satisfy eight hours of the twelve-hour annual continuing
education requirement; however, post-license education hours shall not satisfy the mandatory
continuing education topic specified by the commission.

(2) The commission may accept real estate-related credit hours from an accredited college or
university as partial substitution of the broker licensing educational requirement.

(3) The commission shall have the authority to accept experience in the real estate business or
related fields as credit toward fulfillment of the education requirements set forth herein.

(4)(a) All applicants for a salesperson's license shall show evidence satisfactory to the
commission that they have completed ninety hours or its equivalent of instruction in real estate
coursework approved by the commission prior to licensure. Satisfactory completion includes
passage of an examination on course contents.

(b) Each person obtaining an initial salesperson's license shall complete forty-five post-license
education hours within one hundred eighty days after the initial license date. Such hours shall
be in subjects required by the commission including but not limited to laws, rules and
regulations changes, finance, and the handling of funds. Post-license education hours may be
used in the year completed to satisfy eight hours of the twelve-hour annual continuing
education requirement; however, post-license education hours shall not satisfy the four-hour
mandatory continuing education topics specified by the commission.

(5)(a) In addition to all other education requirements set forth in this Chapter, regardless of
initial license date, the license of an individual real estate broker or salesperson shall not be
renewed unless the broker or salesperson shall furnish proof of completion of twelve hours per 
year of continuing education pertaining to matters, including but not limited to laws, rules, and
regulations relative to licensing, appraisal, finance, taxes, zoning, environmental quality, and
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. A minimum of four of the
required annual continuing education hours shall be in subjects specified by the commission.
Post-license education hours may be used to satisfy eight hours of the twelve-hour annual
continuing education requirement; however, post-license education hours shall not satisfy the
mandatory continuing education topics specified by the commission.

(b) The commission shall promulgate rules and regulations necessary to implement the
continuing education and post-license education requirement and may mandate the
completion of courses in specific real estate-related subjects. Such rules and regulations may
require passage of an examination in order to satisfy the continuing education and post-license
education requirement.

D. Every applicant for a license shall submit a sworn statement attesting that he has knowledge
of and understands the provisions of the Fair Housing Act of 1968 and the Louisiana Equal
Housing Opportunity Act, and any amendments thereto or any successor legislation
subsequently following, and that the applicant shall not induce or attempt to induce any person
to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into an
area, subdivision, or neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, or
national origin.

E. A nonresident may obtain a broker or salesperson license and engage in the real estate
business in this state under conditions prescribed by the commission.

Acts 1978, No. 514, §1. Amended by Acts 1978, No. 658, §1; Acts 1979, No. 404, §1; Acts 1980,
No. 492, §1; Acts 1981, No. 309, §1; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 1991, No.
642, §1; Acts 1993, No. 886, §1; Acts 1995, No. 1207, §§1, 2; Acts 1997, No. 220, §1; Acts 1997,
No. 845, §1; Acts 1997, No. 1141, §2; Acts 1999, No. 452, §3; Acts 1999, No. 629, §1, eff. Jan. 1,
2000; Acts 2001, No. 924, §1; Acts 2008, No. 254, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009; Acts 2016, No. 533, §1.
§1437.1. Timeshare registration
A. Any person or entity desiring to engage directly in the business of selling timeshare interests
must register with the commission.
B. The application for registration shall be in such form as may be required by the commission
and in accordance with R.S. 9:1131.9 so that only persons who have a good reputation for
honesty, trustworthiness, and integrity may be so registered.

(1) The commission shall approve or deny such applications for registration within forty-five
days from receipt of the application by the commission.
 
(2) When an applicant has been convicted of forgery, embezzlement, obtaining money under
false pretenses, larceny, extortion, conspiracy to defraud, or theft, or has been convicted of a
felony or a crime involving moral turpitude in any court of competent jurisdiction, such
untrustworthiness of the applicant, and the conviction, may in itself be sufficient grounds for
refusal of a timeshare interest sales registration.

(3) When an applicant has made a false statement of material fact on his application, such false
statement may in itself be sufficient grounds for refusal of a timeshare interest sales
registration.

(4) Grounds for suspension or revocation of a registration, or real estate license, or the previous
revocation of a real estate license or registration in Louisiana or any other jurisdiction, shall be
grounds for refusal to grant a timeshare interest sales registration.

(5) A timeshare registration shall not be issued to any person who has not attained the age of
eighteen years. A timeshare interest sales registration shall not be issued to any person who is
not a high school graduate or the holder of a certificate of high school equivalency.

C. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to a licensed real estate broker or salesperson
or to employees of a timeshare developer registered under this Section.

D. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, a timeshare developer may not avoid liability to
timeshare purchasers for the acts of timeshare interest salespersons or real estate licensees on
the basis that the timeshare interest salesperson or real estate licensee is merely an
independent contractor.

E. Every nondeveloper timeshare sales registrant shall file and maintain with the Louisiana Real
Estate Commission a bond issued by a surety company authorized to do business in this state in
the amount of ten thousand dollars. This bond shall be in favor of the state for the use, benefit,
and indemnity of any person who suffers any damage or loss as a result of the sale registrant's
unfair or deceptive practice or other violation of law in connection with the sale offer or
solicitation to sell of a timeshare interest.

F. Except for the provisions contained in R.S. 9:1131.12, the changes and additions effected by
Act No. 999 of the 1985 Regular Session of the Legislature shall not apply to any timeshare
project approved to operate by the Louisiana Real Estate Commission on or before June 1,
1985, if all of the following conditions have been met:

(1) Protection under the federal bankruptcy law has not been filed.

(2) The developer has not been suspended by the Louisiana Real Estate Commission.
 
(3) The project has been actively and consistently marketed as a timeshare project, if approved
prior to July 20, 1984.

G. Any timeshare interest salesperson or seller of a timeshare interest shall comply with the
provisions of the Louisiana Real Estate License Law and the rules adopted pursuant thereto,
including licensure, unless otherwise exempt.

(1) The Louisiana Real Estate License Law shall not apply to a timeshare developer registered
under this Section, acting as sole owner or sole lessor of real estate solely owned or solely
leased by the developer, a registered affiliated entity, or a registered wholly-owned subsidiary
of the developer.

(2) The Louisiana Real Estate License Law shall not apply to an existing timeshare owner who
refers prospective purchasers, for compensation, provided that the existing timeshare owner
adheres to all of the following:

(a) Refers no more than twenty prospective purchasers in any calendar year.

(b) Limits such activities to referring prospective purchasers of timeshare interests to the
developer or the developer's employees or agents.

(c) Does not show, discuss terms or conditions, or otherwise participate in negotiation with
regard to timeshare interests.

Added by Acts 1983, No. 552, §2; Acts 1984, No. 943, §2, eff. July 20, 1984; Acts 1985, No. 999,
§§2,4; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 2003, No. 978, §1; Acts 2016, No. 533, §1.
{{NOTE: SEE ACTS 1985, NO. 999, §5.}}
§1437.2. Corporations; limited liability companies; partnerships; broker licenses

A. Any corporation, limited liability company, or partnership formed under the laws of this state
or any foreign corporation, limited liability company, or partnership that has been granted a
certificate of authority to do business in this state may be granted a real estate broker's license
by the commission upon application and compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.

B. Every application for a real estate broker license issued to a corporation, limited liability
company, or partnership shall be submitted by a licensed individual real estate broker who has
been chosen by the corporation, limited liability company, or partnership as its qualifying
broker.

(1) An individual real estate broker may serve as a qualifying broker for more than one
corporation, limited liability company, or partnership.
 
(2) A corporation, limited liability company, or partnership may designate a new qualifying
broker at any time, as provided in R.S. 37:1441(C).

C. A corporation, limited liability company, or partnership shall notify the commission within
five calendar days of its dissolution, accompanied by notice of the termination of the broker
license, as provided in R.S. 37:1441, for each sponsored licensee, at which time the commission
shall cancel the real estate broker license of the corporation, limited liability company, or
partnership, thereby prohibiting such entity from performing any act for which a real estate
broker license is required.

D. A corporation, limited liability company, or partnership shall notify the commission within
five calendar days following the effective date of a merger or consolidation with another
corporation, limited liability company, or partnership.

F.-I. Repealed by Acts 1999, No. 452, §3.

Added by Acts 1983, No. 380, §1. Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 1995, No. 1207,
§1; Acts 1997, No. 845, §1; Acts 1999, No. 452, §3; Acts 2016, No. 533, §1.
§1437.3. Inactive license
A. An inactive license status shall be established.
B. Any licensee in good standing with the commission may elect to place his license in an
inactive license status by submitting the appropriate transfer application and remitting the
applicable fees as set forth in this Chapter. Within the three-month delinquency period
immediately following the expiration of the last active license and upon payment of appropriate
renewal and inactive license transfer fees, former licensees may transfer their license to the
inactive status.

C. During the period the license is in the inactive status, the licensee shall be prohibited from
engaging in any activity requiring a real estate license. The licensee shall be required to renew
the inactive license on an annual basis by filing the required renewal application and paying the
inactive renewal fees as specified in this Chapter.

D. The licensee may request transfer from inactive status to active status at any time, provided
the inactive license is current at the time the request is received at the commission.

E. An inactive licensee will not be required to fulfill the continuing education requirement
established for active licensees on an annual basis; however, upon application to return to
active license status the licensee shall have completed the continuing education specified as
follows:
 
(1) Licensees remaining in the active status for less than one year shall have completed the
twelve-hour continuing education requirement for the previous year.

(2) Licensees remaining in the inactive status from one to five years shall complete the number
of continuing education hours specified herein for the following periods of inactivity:

(a) One to less than three years in the inactive status - twenty hours of continuing education.

(b) Three to less than five years in the inactive status - forty hours of continuing education.

(3) If the licensee remains in the inactive status for two to five renewal periods, the licensee
shall complete a four-hour course covering Louisiana real estate license law or commission
rules and regulations as part of the hours specified in Paragraph (2) of this Subsection to be
eligible to return to active license status. The required four-hour course shall be completed
within one year prior to the date of the license transfer to the active status.

(4)(a) The licensee may remain in the inactive license status indefinitely, provided the licensee
complies with the annual inactive renewal procedures. Licensees remaining in the inactive
status for five or more years shall be required to complete a maximum of eighty hours of
approved continuing education within the five-year period immediately preceding the request
to return to active license status.

(b) Such continuing education shall include a four-hour Louisiana real estate license law or
commission rules and regulations course. The course shall be completed within one year prior
to the date of the license transfer to the active status.

(c) Any licensee that has continued to obtain annual continuing education in the required areas
during the period that the licensee is in the inactive status may cumulate those hours and be
eligible to transfer to the active status at any time.

(5) Any request by an inactive licensee to transfer to active status shall be accompanied by
payment of the prescribed fees and proof of completion of the applicable continuing education
hours.

Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 1995, No. 1207, §1; Acts 1997, No. 845, §1; Acts
1999, No. 629, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 200; Acts 2016, No. 533, §1.
§1438. Applicability
A. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to:

(1) Any unlicensed person, partnership, limited liability company, association, or corporation,
foreign or domestic, provided that the following requirements are met: 
(a) The unlicensed person, partnership, limited liability company, association, or corporation,
foreign or domestic, is the owner or lessor of the property.

(b) The unlicensed person, partnership, limited liability company, association, or corporation,
foreign or domestic, performs acts of ownership regarding the property, either individually or
through an employee or representative.

(c) The provisions of this Section shall not include any unlicensed person, partnership, limited
liability company, association, corporation, foreign or domestic, in the business of selling or
managing timeshare interests.

(2) The service rendered by an attorney at law on behalf of a client that may be required in the
normal course of other legal representation.

(3) A receiver, trustee in bankruptcy, administrator, executor, tutor, or civil sheriff for any
parish of this state.

(4) A trustee selling under a deed of trust or a mortgage.

(5) Any individual, corporation, partnership, trust, limited liability company, joint venture, or
other entity that sells, exchanges, leases, or manages its own property, except persons,
corporations, partnerships, trusts, limited liability companies, joint ventures, and other entities
that are in the business of selling timeshare interests.

(6) Any salaried person employed by a licensed real estate broker for and on behalf of the
owner of any real estate that the licensed broker has contracted to manage for the owner, if
the salaried employee is limited in his employment to the following:

(a) Delivering a lease application, a lease, or any amendment thereof to any person.

(b) Receiving a lease application, lease, or amendment thereof, a security deposit, rental
payment, or any related payment for delivery to and made payable to a property manager or
owner.

(c) Showing a rental unit to any person, as long as the employee is acting under the direct
instructions of the broker, including the execution of leases or rental agreements, provided the
broker is responsible for the actions of his employees.

(d) Providing information about a rental unit, a lease, an application for lease, or the status of a
security deposit or the payment of rent to any person.

(e) Assisting in the performance of property management functions by carrying out
administrative, clerical, or maintenance tasks. 
(7) Any person employed by a housing authority to manage its property or otherwise managing
property of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, but only with respect to the
management of such property.

(8) Any person managing agricultural property.

B, C. Repealed by Acts 1995, No. 1207, §2.

Acts 1990, No. 893, §1; Acts 1995, No. 1207, §§1, 2; Acts 2016, No. 533, §1.
§1439. Issuance of license, certificate, or registration

A. Upon compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and with the rules and regulations of
the commission, the commission shall issue the appropriate license, certificate, or registration
and shall prescribe the form of such license, certificate, or registration.

B. A broker license issued to an individual, partnership, limited liability company, association,
corporation, or other legal entity, shall include the business name, the street address of the
business, and the mailing address of the business, if it is different from the street address.

C. Each sales or associate broker license shall include the following information:

(1) The name of the licensee.

(2) The name of the sponsoring individual real estate broker, or the name of the partnership,
limited liability company, association, corporation, or other legal entity, under which the license
is issued.

(3) The license of each associate broker or salesperson shall be delivered to the individual real
estate broker or the partnership, limited liability company, association, corporation, or other
legal entity, under which the license is issued in the manner and mode determined by the
commission.

D. Each timeshare developer registration shall include the name and street address of the
developer and, the mailing address of the developer, if it is different from the street address.

E. Each timeshare sales registration shall include all of the following information:

(1) The name of the sales registrant.

(2) The residential address of the sales registrant, and the mailing address of the sales
registrant, if it is different from the residential address. 
(3) The name of the developer who employs the sales registrant.

F. The timeshare sales registration shall be delivered to the developer in the manner and mode
determined by the commission and shall be kept in the custody and control of that developer.

G.(1) Associate brokers, salespersons, and timeshare interest salespersons shall not conduct
any activities requiring a license or registration until such license or registration has been issued
and is in the custody of the sponsoring broker or employing timeshare developer.

(2) This provision shall not apply if the sponsoring broker or employing timeshare developer has
received written authorization from the commission authorizing such activity pending the
issuance of the license or timeshare registration by the commission.

Acts 1978, No. 514, §1. Acts 1986, No. 670, §1; Acts 1995, No. 1207, §1; Acts 1997, No. 845, §1;
Acts 1999, No. 452, §2; Acts 2016, No. 533, §1.
§1439.1. Repealed by Acts 1995, No. 1207, §2.
§1439.2. Repealed by Acts 1995, No. 1207, §2.
§1440. Examination
A. Professional competency as referred to in this Chapter shall be established by an
examination prepared by or under the supervision of the commission. The examination shall be
of a scope sufficient in the judgment of the commission to determine that a person is
professionally competent to act as a real estate broker or salesperson. The commission shall
make all necessary rules and regulations governing the time, place, and method of conducting
such examinations.
B. The examination shall consist of such technical and professional subjects relating to the real
estate business as the commission shall prescribe or believe applicable in order to determine
the professional competency of the applicant and to protect the interests of the public.
C. Examinations shall be conducted, administered, and scored by either the Department of
State Civil Service or by a national testing service.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1. Amended by Acts 1980, No. 492, §1; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1,
1990. 
§1441. Return of license or registration upon transfer or termination
A. When the sponsorship of an associate broker or salesperson is terminated for any reason,
the terminating party shall submit a form attesting to the termination to the commission,
within five calendar days of such termination.

(1) Upon submission of a form indicating the termination of sponsorship, the license of an
associate broker or salesperson shall no longer be in force or effect, and the associate broker or
salesperson shall be prohibited from conducting real estate activities, as defined in this
Chapter, until such time as the associate broker or salesperson obtains a new sponsoring
broker.

(2) An associate broker or salesperson, whose sponsorship has been terminated, shall be
entitled to a license transfer upon submission of a form indicating the transfer to a new broker
to the commission and payment of the required fee.

B.(1) When the affiliation of a timeshare sales registrant with a registered developer is
terminated for any reason, the developer shall notify the commission in writing within five days
of such termination.

(2) Any timeshare sales registrant, whose affiliation with a registered developer has been
terminated, shall notify the commission, in writing prior to beginning an affiliation with another
registered developer.

(3) When an affiliate timeshare sales registrant is terminated by a registered timeshare
developer, such sales registration shall no longer be in force or effect, until such time that the
commission receives a written notice that the timeshare sales registrant is affiliated with a new
developer and the prescribed fees have been remitted.

C. When the association between a designated qualifying broker and a partnership, limited
liability company, association, corporation, or other legal entity, foreign or domestic, is
terminated for any reason, the following actions shall be taken:

(1) The terminating party shall submit a copy of the letter or resignation or termination to the
commission, within five calendar days of such termination.

(2) The outgoing qualifying broker shall notify all sponsored licensees within five calendar days
of the termination, including the effective date, by certified or registered mail.
(3) Neither the licensed partnership, limited liability company, association, corporation, or
other legal entity, foreign or domestic, nor any licensee sponsored by the terminated qualifying
broker, shall engage in any real estate activity requiring a license until a new qualifying broker
has been designated by the partnership, limited liability company, association, corporation, or 
other legal entity, foreign or domestic, and the designation has been reflected in the files of the
commission.
(4) Upon termination of a qualifying broker's association with a partnership, limited liability
company, association, corporation, or other legal entity, foreign or domestic, such entity shall
designate a new qualifying broker and shall notify the commission by submission of a form
indicating the designation of such broker within five calendar days of the termination.

(5) Upon designation of a new qualifying broker, the outgoing qualifying broker shall provide
custody of the licenses of all sponsored licensees to the new designated qualifying broker.

(6) All sponsored licensees of the partnership, limited liability company, association,
corporation, or other legal entity, foreign or domestic, shall be informed of the change in the
designation of a qualifying broker, including the effective date, by certified or registered mail,
not later than five calendar days following the effective date of the designation.

Acts 1978, No. 514, §1. Acts 1986, No. 839, §1; Acts 1995, No. 1207, §1; Acts 1997, No. 845, §1;
Acts 2016, No. 533, §1.
§1441.1. Repealed by Acts 1995, No. 1207, §2.
§1442. License, certificate, and registration issuance and renewal
A. Each license, certificate, or registration issued under this Chapter shall be issued for a period
of one year and shall expire on December thirty-first following the date upon which it is issued.
Each license, certificate, or registration shall be renewed annually. Conducting any activity
authorized by the license, certificate, or registration after the expiration of the license,
certificate, or registration shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter. Licenses, certificates, or
registrations not renewed by January first shall be considered expired.
B. Any licensee or registrant who fails to renew timely may thereafter renew upon payment of
the appropriate renewal and delinquent fees and upon filing of a complete renewal application.
The period for delinquent renewal of an expired license or registration shall be limited to the
three-month period immediately following the expiration date of the active license or
registration. Failure to delinquently renew an expired license or registration during this threemonth period shall result in a forfeiture of renewal rights and shall require the former licensee
or registrant to apply as an initial applicant and meet all requirements of an initial applicant.
C. Any inactive licensee who fails to renew timely may thereafter renew upon payment of the
appropriate renewal fees and filing of a complete renewal application. The period for
delinquent renewal of an expired delinquent inactive license will be limited to the three-month
period immediately following the expiration date of the inactive license. Failure to renew
delinquently an expired inactive license during the three-month period will result in the 
forfeiture of renewal rights and will require the former licensee to apply as an initial applicant
and meet all requirements of an initial applicant.
D. Timeshare registrants who fail to renew timely may thereafter renew within three months of
the expiration of their registration upon payment of a delinquency renewal fee; however,
registered developers of timeshare projects who qualify under Section 5 of Act No. 999 of the
1985 Regular Session of the Legislature but who fail to renew timely shall no longer qualify
under that Section.
Acts 1983, No. 269, §1; Acts 1983, No. 552, §2; Acts 1986, No. 840, §1; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1,
eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 1995, No. 1207, §1; Acts 1999, No. 452, §2; Acts 2007, No. 35, §1.
§1443. Fees
The commission may charge:

(1) Initial fees for licensing or certification:

(a) Individual real estate broker's license $120.00

(b) Corporate, partnership, or limited liability company real estate broker's license $120.00

(c) Branch office license $ 45.00

(d) Real estate salesperson's license $ 45.00

(e) School certification $650.00

(f) Instructor application/certification $ 35.00

(g) Instructor certification re-examination $ 35.00

(h) Continuing education vendor $300.00

(2) Renewal fees for licensing or certification:

(a) Real estate active broker's license $ 70.00

(b) Real estate inactive broker's license $ 35.00

(c) Branch office license $ 45.00
 
(d) Real estate active salesperson's license $ 35.00

(e) Real estate inactive salesperson's license $ 35.00
(f) School certification $300.00

(g) Instructor certification $ 35.00

(h) Continuing education vendor $150.00

(3) Fees for timeshare registration:

(a) Initial public offering statement filing fee $500.00

(b) Additional public offering statement filing fee $250.00

(c) Initial timeshare developer registration $120.00

(d) Timeshare developer renewal fee $ 70.00

(e) Initial timeshare interest salesperson fee $ 45.00

(f) Timeshare interest salesperson renewal fee $ 35.00

(g) Repealed by Acts 2016, No. 533, §2.
(4) Delinquent fees, in addition to the renewal fee, if not renewed by December thirty-first of
the applicable license, registration, or certification period:

(a) January 1 - February 15 Active and inactive Licensees $ 50.00

(b) February 16 - March 31 Active Licensees $200.00

(c) February 16 - March 31 Inactive Licensees $ 50.00

(d) January 1 - January 31 Real estate schools, vendors, and pre-license instructors $ 50.00

(5) Transfer fees:

(a) Active status to inactive status $ 45.00

(b) Inactive status to active status $ 45.00

(c) All other transfers $ 35.00

(6) Processing fee $ 25.00
(7) License verification $ 25.00

(8) Continuing education course registration $ 15.00

Acts 1978, No. 514, §1; Amended by Acts 1981, No. 309, §1; Acts 1983, No. 552, §2; Acts 1985,
No. 999, §2; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 1995, No. 1207, §1; Acts 1997, No.
845, §1; Acts 2007, No. 35, §1; Acts 2016, No. 533, §§1, 2.
§1444. Broker, place of business; branch office license
The business address registered by a broker with the commission shall be considered as the
place of business from which the broker will conduct real estate activities requiring licensing in
Louisiana. If a broker conducts business from more than one place of business, a branch office
license shall be required for each place of business maintained by the broker.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1; Acts 1995, No. 1207, §1.
§1445. Unlicensed persons cannot recover brokerage charges
No action or suit shall be instituted, nor recovery be had, in any court of this state by any
person for compensation for any act done or service rendered, the doing or rendering of which
is prohibited under the provision of this Chapter to other licensed brokers or licensed
salespersons unless such person was duly licensed under this Chapter as a broker or
salesperson prior to the time of offering to perform any such act or service or procuring any
promise to contract for the payment of compensation for any such contemplated act of service.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1; Acts 1984, No. 943, §2, eff. July 20, 1984; Acts 1984, No. 814, §1; Acts
1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.
§1446. Compensation; independent contractor status of salespersons and associate brokers

A. No payment of a commission or compensation shall be made by any licensee or registrant to
any person who has not first secured a license or registration under the provisions of this
Chapter. This Subsection shall not apply to a nonresident broker who is currently licensed in his
state of residence.
 
B. No payment of a commission or other compensation shall be made by any broker to any
licensee when the paying broker has knowledge that the receiving licensee has agreed to pay or
intends to pay or otherwise deliver a portion of the commission or compensation to an
unlicensed person or entity.
C. Associate brokers, salespersons, and timeshare interest salespersons shall not pay or offer to
pay any commission or valuable consideration for the performance of any act herein specified.
D. Payment of a commission or compensation may be made to and accepted by former
licensees and registrants for transactions negotiated by them while duly licensed or registered
by the commission.

E. An active licensee may accept compensation for transactions that were initiated by the
licensee while under sponsorship of a former sponsoring or qualifying broker, provided that the
compensation is transmitted through the current sponsoring or qualifying broker.

F. An active real estate licensee shall not accept a commission or other valuable consideration
for the performance of any act herein specified, or for performing any act relating thereto, from
any person, except their sponsoring or qualifying broker.

G. Associate brokers and salespersons may assign or direct that commissions or other
compensation earned in connection with a real estate transaction be paid by their licensed
sponsoring broker to an unlicensed corporation of which the associate broker or salesperson is
the sole officer, director, and shareholder, or an unlicensed limited liability company of which
the associate broker or salesperson is the sole manager.

H. A sponsored real estate licensee shall be an independent contractor of the sponsoring or
qualifying broker for all purposes and shall not be an employee of the sponsoring or qualifying
broker, if all of the following conditions are met:

(1) The real estate salesperson or associate broker is a licensee.

(2) Substantially all of the sponsored licensee's remuneration for the services performed is
directly related to sales or other output rather than the number of hours worked.

(3) There is a written agreement between the sponsored licensee and the sponsoring or
qualifying broker that specifies that the sponsored licensee will not be treated as an employee.

Acts 1978, No. 514, §1; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 1995, No. 1207, §1; Acts
1997, No. 845, §1; Acts 1999, No. 452, §2; Acts 2003, No. 321, §1; Acts 2006, No. 332, §1, eff.
July 1, 2006; Acts 2016, No. 533, §1.
§1447. Referral fees; interference with brokerage relationships
A.(1) It is unlawful for any person, including but not limited to a relocation company, to directly
or indirectly solicit or request a referral fee or similar payment for the referral of a buyer or
seller unless the person seeking the referral fee has reasonable cause. Reasonable cause shall
not exist unless:
(a) The person seeking the referral fee introduced the client to the licensee or registrant from
whom the referral fee is being sought; or
(b) The person seeking the referral fee has a written contractual relationship with the licensee
or registrant for a referral fee or similar payment; and
(c) The licensee or registrant has received the client referral prior to the client contracting to
buy or list real estate with the licensee or registrant.
(2) The solicitation or request of a referral fee or similar payment in accordance with this
Subsection shall not create a legal right to be paid such fee or payment.
B. It is unlawful to interfere with a real estate brokerage relationship. The demand for a
referral fee from a licensee or registrant when reasonable cause for payment does not exist
constitutes interference with a real estate brokerage relationship. A threat by a third party to
reduce, withhold, or eliminate any relocation benefits in order to generate a referral fee from a
licensee or registrant when reasonable cause for payment does not exist also constitutes
interference with a real estate brokerage relationship. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
communications between an employer or its representative and an employee concerning
relocation policies and benefits shall not constitute interference with a real estate brokerage
relationship.
C. It is unlawful for any person, licensed or unlicensed, to interfere with the contractual
relationship between a licensee or registrant and a client by counseling a client or another
licensee or registrant on how to terminate or amend an existing contractual relationship
between a licensee or registrant and a client. Communicating a company's relocation policy or
benefits to an employee or consumer shall not be considered a violation of this Subsection as
long as the communication does not involve advice or encouragement on how to terminate or
amend an existing contractual relationship between a licensee or registrant and a client.
D. A prevailing party in any action for violations of this Section may be awarded actual
damages, plus reasonable attorney fees. In addition to bringing an action in court, violations of
this Section may be addressed through mediation services. Such mediation services shall
include but shall not be limited to mediation through real estate entities who specifically offer
programs for resolving complaints involving real estate referral fees.
Acts 2001, No. 261, §1.
§1448. Revocation or suspension of licenses
A. Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked in accordance with this Chapter shall be
deemed an unlicensed person during the period of suspension or revocation and shall be
subject to the penalties prescribed for unlicensed persons, if he engages in activity requiring
licensure during the period of suspension or revocation. The commission retains jurisdiction
over all unlicensed persons relative to violations of and enforcement of the provisions of this
Chapter.
B. The revocation or suspension of a broker's license shall automatically suspend the license of
every associate broker or salesperson who is sponsored by the broker whose license was
suspended or revoked. The sponsoring broker shall, within seventy-two hours of notification by
the commission of the final action on the revocation or suspension of his license, return to the
commission all licenses of the licensees sponsored by him.
C. A sponsoring broker shall, within seventy-two hours of notification by the commission, return
his license or the license of any associate broker or salesperson sponsored by him when such
license has been suspended or revoked by the commission.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1. Amended by Acts 1981, No. 309, §1; Acts 1995, No. 1207, §1; Acts
2003, No. 713, §1.
§1448.1. Non-compete agreements
A. A non-compete agreement between a real estate broker and licensee which requires the
licensee to refrain from carrying on or engaging in a business similar to that of the real estate
broker or from soliciting customers of the real estate broker within a specified parish or
parishes, municipality or municipalities, or parts thereof, so long as the real estate broker
carries on a like business therein, for any period of time up to two years, shall be unenforceable
and an absolute nullity unless the licensee shall have the right to rescind the non-compete
agreement until midnight of the third business day following the execution of the non-compete
agreement or the delivery of the agreement to the licensee, whichever is later. In any
agreement between the broker and licensee, which includes a non-compete agreement, the
non-compete agreement shall be prominently displayed in bold-faced block lettering of not less
than ten-point type.
B. Any action to enforce the provisions of this Section shall be brought in a court of competent
jurisdiction in this state.
C. The provisions of this Section shall be effective as to agreements entered into after January
1, 2006.
Acts 2005, No. 229, §1.
§1448.2. Revocation or suspension of registration
A timeshare registrant will within seventy-two hours of notification by the commission of the
final action on the revocation or suspension of a registration issued to a timeshare interest
salesperson or a timeshare developer return such registration to the commission.
Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.
§1448.3. Net listing agreements
It is unlawful for any real estate broker to advise or encourage a seller in relation to, or to enter
into, a net listing agreement as described in R.S. 37:1431(34), for the sale of residential real
estate property or any land as defined in R.S. 47:2302.
Acts 2015, No. 81, §1.
§1449. Broker to insure provision of contract; retention of records
A. Licensees acting in the capacity of an agent or subagent, and registrants shall insure that
their respective principal party signing any document in a real estate transaction is provided a
copy of the document immediately after the signing of the document.

B. Licensees and registrants shall insure that persons signing any document in a real estate
transaction that pertains to more than one party are provided with a copy of the completed
document bearing the signatures of all parties to the transaction within five days after the final
signature is affixed to the document.

C. Written agreements for the sale or management of real estate shall specify a definite
expiration date that shall not be subject to qualifying terms or conditions.

D.(1) Individual real estate brokers shall retain all of the following records, readily available and
properly indexed, for a period of five years:

(a) Bank statements, copies of deposit slips, and cancelled checks on all escrow or trust
accounts.

(b) Copies of all documents that pertain in any way to real estate transactions wherein the
individual real estate broker or licensees sponsored by the individual real estate broker have
appeared in a licensing capacity.

(2) The requirement regarding copies shall not be altered by the transfer of a broker to that of
an associate broker, an unlicensed person, or an inactive licensee. 
E.(1) Partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, corporations, or other legal entities,
foreign or domestic, and real estate brokers shall retain the following records, readily available
and properly indexed, for a period of five years:

(a) Bank statements, copies of deposit slips, and cancelled checks on all escrow or trust
accounts.

(b) Copies of all documents that pertain in any way to real estate transactions wherein the
partnership, limited liability company, association, corporation, or other legal entity, foreign or
domestic, the designated qualifying broker, or licensees sponsored by same, have appeared in a
licensing capacity.

(2) This requirement, regarding copies, shall not be altered by the partnership, limited liability
company, association, corporation, or other legal entity, foreign or domestic, transferring the
broker license to the inactive status or failure to renew such license.

Acts 1978, No. 514, §1; Acts 1984, No. 943, §4, eff. July 20, 1984; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff.
Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 1991, No. 642, §1; Acts 1995, No. 1207, §1; Acts 1997, No. 845, §1; Acts 2003,
No. 1123, §1, eff. July 2, 2003; Acts 2016, No. 533, §1.
§1449.1. Duty of real estate licensees to use purchase agreement forms
A. A licensee representing either the buyer or seller of residential real property shall complete
the purchase agreement form prescribed by the Louisiana Real Estate Commission in making an
offer to purchase or sell residential real property. No person shall alter the purchase
agreement form; however, addendums or amendments to the purchase agreement form may
be utilized.
B. The promulgation of this form shall be conducted in accordance with the Administrative
Procedure Act no later than July 1, 2007.
C.(1) As used in this Section, the term "purchase agreement form" shall mean a document in a
form prescribed by the Louisiana Real Estate Commission as a written agreement for the sale or
purchase of residential real property.
(2) As used in this Section, the term "residential real property" means real property consisting
of one or not more than four residential dwelling units, which are buildings or structures each
of which are occupied or intended for occupancy as single family residences.
D. The provisions of this Section shall apply to the sale of residential real property on or after
January 1, 2008.
Acts 2006, No. 333, §1.
§1450. Duty of licensees, registrants, and certificate holders to report legal action pertaining
to real estate activities
A. It shall be the duty of every licensee, registrant, and certificate holder to notify the
commission within ten days by registered or certified mail or by hand delivery of the following
actions:
(1) The rendering of a final judgment against him by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
subject matter of which involves a real estate transaction in which he was acting as a licensee,
registrant, or certificate holder.
(2) The institution of criminal prosecution by arrest or indictment the subject matter of which
involves a real estate transaction in which he was acting as a licensee, registrant, or certificate
holder.
(3) Any final conviction of him by a court of competent jurisdiction for forgery, embezzlement,
obtaining money under false pretenses, larceny, extortion, conspiracy to defraud, theft, or any
other felony, or any crime involving moral turpitude.
B. It shall be the duty of every licensee, registrant, and certificate holder who is the custodian of
client funds to report the institution of bankruptcy proceedings to the commission, in writing
and by registered or certified mail or hand delivery within ten days of institution of such
proceedings.
(1) Bankruptcy proceedings which shall be reported include those in which the petitioner is
named as a debtor, whether classified as voluntary or involuntary, personal, corporate, or
partnership, or which is in any way connected with the licensee's, registrant's, or certificate
holder's real estate business activities.
(2) The report to the commission shall include a listing which identifies the owner or owners of
the funds, the amount of funds held, the name of the financial institution, and the number of
the account in which the funds are deposited.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1. Amended by Acts 1981, No. 594, §1; Acts 1983, No. 552, §2; Acts 1989,
No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 1995, No. 1207, §1.
§1451. Death or incapacity of a real estate broker

A.(1) The commission shall be notified in writing when a sponsoring broker dies and shall have
the authority to appoint an active licensed associate broker or salesperson to complete, carry
out, and enforce any incomplete real estate business activities of the deceased sponsoring
broker, including real estate contracts left pending at the time of the death.
 
(2) The associate broker or salesperson shall immediately notify all sponsored licensees that the
sponsoring broker has died. Such notice shall advise the sponsored licensees that no new
contracts shall be instituted.

(3) In the absence of any sponsored licensees, the commission shall have the authority to
appoint an active licensed broker to complete, carry out, and enforce any incomplete real
estate activities of the deceased sponsoring broker, including real estate contracts left pending
at the time of the death.

B. In the event of the physical or mental impairment of an individual real estate broker, the
commission shall have the authority to appoint another individual real estate broker to
complete, carry out, and enforce any incomplete real estate business activities of the impaired
sponsoring broker, including real estate contracts left pending at the time of the impairment.

C. In the event of the physical or mental impairment of a sponsoring broker, an associate broker
or, in the absence of an associate broker, a salesperson sponsored by the broker may be
appointed by the commission to temporarily assume the duties and responsibilities of the
broker.

D. In the event of the death or physical or mental incapacity of a qualifying broker, the
commission shall be immediately notified and the licensed corporation, limited liability
company, or partnership shall appoint a new qualifying broker within five days.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 1995, No. 1207, §1; Acts
2016, No. 533, §1.
§1452. REPEALED BY ACTS 1989, NO. 655, §2, EFF. JAN. 1, 1990.
§1453. Investigations
A. The commission may, upon its own motion, and shall, upon the verified complaint in writing
of any person, investigate the actions of any licensee, registrant, certificate holder, or any
person who assumes to act in any such capacity. Such an investigation may include inquiries
and inspections of records.
B. Every licensee, registrant, and certificate holder shall cooperate fully with and answer all
questions propounded by commission personnel conducting an investigation, inquiry, or
records inspection.
C. Every licensee, registrant, and certificate holder shall produce any document, book, or
record in his possession, or under his control, relative to any investigation, inquiry, or records
inspection conducted by commission personnel.
D. The commission shall not become involved in disputes between licensees or registrants in
any matter regarding the entitlement to or payment of commissions, fees, or compensation
involving the sale or lease of real estate.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1; Acts 1983, No. 552, §2; Acts 1986, No. 842, §1; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1,
eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 1995, No. 1207, §1.
§1454. False information
It is unlawful for any person or his agent to file with the commission any notice, statement, or
other document, required under the provisions of this Chapter which is false or contains any
material misstatement of fact.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.
§1455. Causes for censure, suspension, or revocation of license, registration, or certification
A. The commission may censure a licensee, registrant, or certificate holder or conditionally or
unconditionally suspend or revoke any license, registration, or certificate issued under this
Chapter, levy fines or impose civil penalties not to exceed five thousand dollars, or impose
continuing education requirements on licensees, registrants, or certificate holders if, in the
opinion of the commission, a licensee, registrant, or certificate holder is performing or
attempting to perform or has performed or has attempted to perform any of the following acts:
(1) Committing any act in violation of the Louisiana Real Estate License Law not specified in this
Section.
(2) Violating any rule or regulation promulgated by the commission in the interest of the public
and consistent with the provisions of this Chapter.
(3) Committing any act in violation of the Louisiana Timesharing Act.
(4) Failure to account for any money coming into his possession belonging to others.
(5) Failure to properly disburse money which belongs to others upon its coming into his
possession.
(6) Commingling the money or other property of his principals with his own.
(7) Accepting, giving, or charging any undisclosed commission, rebate, or direct profit on
expenditures made for a principal.
(8) Representing or attempting to represent a real estate broker or real estate agency other
than the licensed broker or agency listed on the real estate license issued by the commission.
(9) Acting in the dual capacity of agent and undisclosed principal in any transaction. However,
such a relationship shall not constitute dual agency if the licensee is the seller or lessor of
property that he owns or if the property is owned by a real estate business of which the
licensee is the sole proprietor and agent and the same is disclosed to the buyer or tenant.
(10) Guaranteeing or authorizing any person to guarantee future profits which may result from
the resale of real property.
(11) Offering real estate for sale or lease without the written consent of the owner or his
authorized agents. Undivided real estate may be offered for sale or lease with the written
consent of the owner of the property to be sold or leased as to his undivided portion of the
property.
(12) Offering real estate for sale or lease on terms other than those authorized by the owner or
his authorized agent.
(13) Offering any inducement to or in any way encouraging a party to a written contract
involving the sale, lease, or management of real estate to break such contract for the purpose
of substituting, in lieu thereof, a new contract with another principal or licensee.
(14) Negotiating the sale, exchange, lease, or management of real estate directly with an owner
or lessor of the real estate if he knows that such owner or lessor has a written outstanding
contract in connection with such real estate granting an exclusive agency or an exclusive right
to sell, exchange, lease, or manage the real estate to another broker.
(15) Knowingly making any false representations to any party in a real estate transaction.
(16) Acting for more than one party in a real estate transaction without the written
acknowledgment of all parties to the transaction.
(17) Failure by an associate broker or salesperson to place, as soon after receipt as practicable,
in the custody of his licensed broker any deposit money or other money or funds entrusted to
him by any person dealing with him as the representative of his licensed broker or in
connection with any transaction involving the sale, lease, or management of real property.
(18) Representing to any lender, guaranteeing agency, or any other interested party, either
verbally or through the preparation of false documents, an amount in excess of the true and
actual sale price of the real estate or terms differing from those actually agreed upon.
(19) Knowingly permitting a sponsored licensee to operate as an individual real estate broker.
(20) Knowingly permitting a sponsored licensee or an employee to conduct real estate activities
in violation of this Chapter.
(21) Failure of a licensee to provide the parties to a real estate transaction with an agency
disclosure informational pamphlet and, where applicable, a dual agency disclosure form.
(22) Failure to advise all parties to a real estate transaction in writing of compensation being
received from any source in connection with that real estate transaction.
(23) Failure without just cause to surrender unto the rightful owner, upon demand, any
document or instrument received by a licensee or registrant in the course of a real estate
transaction.
(24) Accepting other than cash as earnest money or good faith deposit unless that fact is
communicated to the owner prior to the acceptance of the offer to purchase, and such fact is
shown on the face of the purchase and sale agreement.
(25) Failure of a licensee to inform the buyer and seller at the time an offer is presented that
either party may be expected to pay certain costs such as discount points, etc. and the
approximate amount of said costs.
(26) Failure to reduce a bona fide offer to writing when a proposed purchaser requests that a
written offer be submitted.
(27) Failure to disclose to a buyer a known material defect regarding the condition of real
estate of which a broker, salesperson, or timeshare interest salesperson has knowledge.
(28) Having been finally adjudicated and found guilty for refusing, because of race, color,
national origin, sex, or ethnic group, to show, sell, or rent any real estate for sale or rent to
qualified purchasers or renters or for any violation of the Fair Housing Act of 1968 or the
Louisiana Equal Housing Opportunity Act and/or any amendments thereto or any successor
legislation subsequently following.
(29) Having been convicted of a felony or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a felony
charge.
(30) Refusing to appear or testify under oath at any hearing held by the commission.
(31) Procuring a license, registration, or certificate for himself or anyone else by fraud,
misrepresentation, or deceit.
(32) Failure to comply with an order or consent order issued or approved by the commission
pursuant to adjudicatory proceedings.
(33) Failure by a licensee to provide a buyer or seller with a written property disclosure form for
sales and certain leases involving residential real property pursuant to R.S. 9:3196 et seq.
(34) Engaging in real estate activity or attempting or offering to engage in real estate activity
within the state during any period of suspension of a real estate license by the commission or
revocation of any real estate license by the commission.
(35) Using advertising that is misleading or inaccurate.
(36) Engaging in any effort, including referral or recommendation of a specific home inspector,
with the intent to deceive or defraud.
B. The commission may suspend or revoke the registration of any timeshare developer who
knowingly allows any person or entity who does not have a current timeshare interest sales
registration or current Louisiana real estate license to sell timeshare interests owned by the
timeshare developer.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1. Amended by Acts 1979, No. 404, §1; Acts 1980, No. 388, §1; Acts 1983,
No. 552, §2; Acts 1984, No. 943, §2, eff. July 20, 1984; Acts 1986, No. 838, §1; Acts 1986, No.
841, §1; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 1991, No. 354, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1992; Acts
1995, No. 1207, §1; Acts 1997, No. 32, §1; Acts 1997, No. 1141, §2; Acts 1999, No. 452, §2; Acts
2003, No. 308, §2, eff. June 13, 2003; Acts 2003, No. 713, §1; Acts 2005, No. 78, §1; Acts 2014,
No. 572, §1.
§1456. Notice of charges; hearing; censure, suspension, or revocation of license, registration,
or certificate; criminal action
A.(1) Before censuring, suspending, or revoking any license or registration, or certification, or
imposing continuing education requirements, the Louisiana Real Estate Commission shall,
except for the reasons set forth in R.S. 37:1463(G), notify in writing the licensee or person
registered or certified of any charges made, at least twenty days prior to the date set for the
hearing, and shall afford him an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel. Notice shall
be satisfied by mailing a copy of the charges by certified mail to the licensee's, registrant's, or
certificate holder's address on file with the commission or by commission personnel hand
delivering a copy of the charges to the licensee, registrant, or certificate holder.
(2) The written notice may be served either personally on a broker or salesperson or the
registered agent for a corporation, limited liability company, or partnership, or sent by
registered or certified mail to the last known business address of the licensee or registered
agent.
(3) If the licensee is an associate broker or a salesperson, the commission also shall inform the
sponsoring broker of the specific charges against the associate broker or salesperson by sending
notice thereof by registered or certified mail to the broker's last known business address.
(4) If the licensee is a corporate, partnership, or limited liability broker, the commission shall
inform the designated qualifying broker and the registered agent of the specific charges against
the licensee by sending notice thereof by registered or certified mail to the last known business
address of the qualifying broker or the registered agent.
(5) If the licensee is a designated qualifying broker for one or more licensed corporations,
limited liability companies, or partnerships, the commission shall inform each corporation,
limited liability company, or partnership represented by the broker of the specific charges
against the broker by sending notice thereof by registered or certified mail to the registered
agent for each corporation, limited liability company, or partnership represented by the broker.
(6) The commission shall have the power to subpoena and issue subpoenas duces tecum and to
bring before it any person in this state, or take testimony by deposition, in the same manner
prescribed by law in judicial proceedings in the courts of this state, or to require production of
any records relevant to an inquiry or hearing by the commission. Any final decision or
determination of the commission shall be reviewable by the Nineteenth Judicial District Court
in the parish of East Baton Rouge.
B.(1) The hearing on the charges shall be at a time and place prescribed by the commission and
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 13 of Title 49 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of
1950.
(2) The commission may make findings of fact and shall deliver or mail such findings to the
licensee charged with an offense under the provisions of this Part. Any finding of fact by the
commission pursuant to the provisions of this Subsection shall be conclusive.
(3) The Nineteenth Judicial District Court of the state may review questions of law involved in
any final decision of the commission. Any application for review made by an aggrieved party
shall be filed within thirty days after the final decision of the commission.
(4) If the court finds that the Louisiana Real Estate Commission has regularly pursued its
authority and has not acted arbitrarily, it shall affirm the decision, order, or ruling of the
commission. If a petition to review the final decision of the commission is filed, the case shall
be specifically fixed for trial within thirty days from the filing of an answer by the commission.
C. Administrative proceedings under this Chapter before the commission are not exclusive
remedies. Criminal action under the terms of this Chapter may be simultaneously instituted and
maintained against the accused for any violation of this Chapter. The commission may also
separately or simultaneously bring and carry on an action by injunction to restrain a licensed or 
unlicensed individual from further violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, during the
pendency of the criminal proceeding or proceedings before the commission and against any
unlawful practice thereafter.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1; Acts 1983, No. 552, §2; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts
1997, No. 845, §1; Acts 1999, No. 452, §2; Acts 2003, No. 713, §1.
§1457. Judicial proceedings
A. If an appeal is taken under R.S. 37:1456, the court shall receive the entire record of the
hearing.
B. All judicial proceedings relative to actions taken by the commission shall be filed in and
adjudicated by the Nineteenth Judicial District Court in the parish of East Baton Rouge.
C. Absent an agreement of counsel for all parties, no stay of enforcement of a decision issued
under R.S. 37:1456 or for a violation of R.S. 37:1459, during the pendency of an appeal shall be
granted unless the Nineteenth Judicial District Court finds that the applicant has established
that the issuance of the stay does not threaten harm to other interested parties.
D. No stay shall be granted ex parte. The court shall schedule a hearing on the request for a
stay order within ten days from filing. The decision shall be rendered within five days after the
conclusion of the hearing.
E. No judicial order staying or enjoining the effectiveness or enforcement of a final decision or
order of the commission in an adjudication proceeding shall be effective, or be issued to be
effective, longer than one hundred twenty days from the date on which the commission's
decision or order was rendered, or the date on which the court enters judgment in a
proceeding for judicial review of the commission's decision or order pursuant to R.S. 49:964,
whichever comes first.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1; Acts 1995, No. 1207, §1; Acts 1997, No. 845, §1; Acts 2003, No. 713, §1.
§1458. Penalty
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not more than two
thousand dollars or imprisoned not more than five years, or both.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1; Acts 2003, No. 713, §1.
§1459. Real estate activity; unlicensed persons

A.(1) In addition to any other civil remedy or civil penalty provided for in this Chapter, the
commission may issue a subpoena to any person or persons who the commission has probable
cause to believe has engaged in real estate activity without a currently valid license.

(2) Subpoenas issued by the commission shall comply with the notice requirements of R.S.
49:955. These subpoenas shall be served upon the unlicensed individual personally or by any
type of mailing requiring a return receipt and shall include a statement of the manner in which
the unlicensed person shall be required to respond to the commission.

B. The commission may impose a civil penalty of no more than five thousand dollars upon any
unlicensed person who, after a hearing or informal resolution in accordance with all provisions
of this Chapter and the Administrative Procedure Act, is found to have engaged in real estate
activity without the benefit of a currently valid license having been issued by the commission
pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. In addition, the commission may assess costs and
attorney fees against the unlicensed person found to have been engaged in real estate activity
without a current license.

C. The fact that any person engages in or performs or offers to engage in or perform any of the
practices, acts, or operations constituting "real estate activity" as set forth in R.S. 37:1431 is
prima facie evidence that such person is engaged in the illegal practice of real estate.

D. No person engaged in real estate activity without a currently valid license shall have the right
to receive any compensation for services so rendered. In addition to any other penalties
imposed under R.S. 37:1455 and 1458, the commission may require that any person engaged in
real estate activity without a license return any fees collected for engaging in real estate
activity.
Acts 2003, No. 713, §1; Acts 2006, No. 343, §1.
§1460. Certification and regulation of real estate schools, instructors and continuing
education vendors
A. The Louisiana Real Estate Commission shall have the authority to establish rules and
regulations to certify, regulate, and discipline real estate schools and instructors in the state.
The commission shall establish standards for course content including the legal, economic,
mathematical, ethical considerations, and fundamentals of the real estate business.
B. The Louisiana Real Estate Commission shall have the authority to certify, regulate, and
discipline real estate continuing education vendors in the state and to establish rules and
regulations pertaining thereto. 
C. The commission shall not certify, or accept educational hours for credit from, any real estate
school or any real estate continuing education vendor in which a substantial economic interest
is held by a legislator or a member of the commission, member of his immediate family, or any
entity in which he directly or indirectly holds a substantial economic interest.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.
§1461. Real estate recovery fund
A. There is created the Louisiana Real Estate Recovery Fund, hereinafter referred to as the
"recovery fund". Money from the recovery fund shall be disbursed as provided in this Chapter
on order of the commission as reimbursement to any person who is adjudged to have suffered
monetary damages by reason of any of the following acts committed as part of any transaction
involving the sale or lease of real property in this state by any real estate broker or salesperson
who was licensed under the provisions of this Chapter at the time the alleged act was
committed:
(1) Any violation of the Louisiana Real Estate License Law.
(2) Obtaining money or property by fraud, misrepresentation, deceit, false pretenses, artifice,
trickery, or by any other act which would constitute any violation prescribed in this Chapter.
B.(1) In addition to the license fees provided for in R.S. 37:1443 and those fees provided for in
R.S. 37:1464, upon initial issuance and/or renewal of every real estate broker's and real estate
salesperson's license as well as any and all other types of licenses, if any, issued by the
commission after January 1, 1979 and until December 31, 1980, the commission may charge
each of the aforesaid licensees an amount not to exceed eight dollars per year to be deposited
and included in the recovery fund, said amounts to be collectable on a two year basis.
(2) After December 31, 1980, for the initial issuance and/or renewal of each license specified
herein, except a timeshare interest sales registration, the commission may levy a fee in an
amount needed to provide for the reasonable administration of the recovery fund; to provide
for the replacement of payments out of the recovery fund so that the minimum level as
specified in Subsection C of this Section is retained subject to a credit for the interest earned by
the recovery fund itself, and
(3) Further provided that all initial applicants after the first initial license period, January 1, 1979
to December 31, 1980, shall pay the same amount as that charged during the first recovery
fund collection period specified herein.
(4) The accrued surplus, if any, in the recovery fund over and above the four hundred thousand
dollar minimum level after payment of the administration and losses from the fund may be
transferred on December 31 of each calendar year by voucher properly drawn and signed by 
the chairman of the commission or his designee to the research and education fund for use as
specified in R.S. 37:1464.
C. The commission shall maintain a minimum level of four hundred thousand dollars for
recovery and guaranty purposes. These funds may be invested by the commission under the
same limitations as other state funds and the interest thereon shall be deposited to the credit
of the recovery fund.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1. Amended by Acts 1983, No. 379, §1; Acts 1983, No. 552, §2; Acts 1989,
No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.
§1462. Conditions for recovery; eligibility
A.(1) Any person shall be eligible to seek recovery from the recovery fund if all of the following
conditions have been met:
(a) The claimant has received final judgment in a court of competent jurisdiction in this state in
any action wherein the cause of action was based on any violation prescribed in this Chapter.
(b) At the time the action was commenced, the claimant gave notice thereof to the Real Estate
Commission by certified mail. When the Real Estate Commission receives notice of any action,
as required, the commission may intervene, enter an appearance, file an answer, defend the
action, or take any action it deems appropriate on behalf of, and in the name of, the defendant
and take recourse through any appropriate method of review on behalf of, and in the name of,
the defendant.
(c) The claimant has made such judgment executory, and the return of the constable or sheriff
showing that executing the same has made a return showing that no personal or real property
of the judgment debtor can be found, or that the amount realized on the sale of the judgment
debtor's property pursuant to such execution was insufficient to satisfy the judgment.
(d)(i) The claimant has made all reasonable searches and inquiries to ascertain whether the
judgment debtor is possessed of real or personal property or other assets subject to being sold
or applied in satisfaction of the judgment, and by his search he has discovered no property or
assets, or that he has discovered property and assets and that he has taken all necessary action
and proceedings for the application thereof to the judgment and that the amount thereby
realized was insufficient to satisfy the judgment.
(ii) The claimant has diligently pursued his remedies against all the judgment debtors and all
persons liable to him in the transaction for which he seeks recovery from the recovery fund. If
the recovery fund claim is based on the actions of a corporation, partnership, or limited liability
company, the claimant must have diligently pursued all possible remedies against the qualifying
broker for the corporation, partnership, or limited liability company.
(iii) If the judgment debtor has sought protection under the federal bankruptcy law, the
claimant must provide a stamped copy of the proof of claim submitted to the bankruptcy court
handling the case of the judgment debtor.
(e) Any amount recovered by the claimant from the judgment debtor, or from any other source,
has been applied to the damages awarded by the courts.
(f) The right to recovery under this Subsection shall be forever barred unless application is
made within one hundred eighty days from the date of the final judgment of all judicial
proceedings, including appeals.
(g) After proper review, the commission may, after receiving written approval of the state
attorney general's office, pay the claim or offer such compromise as is deemed just and
equitable.
(2) Consent judgments shall not be eligible for payment from the recovery fund unless the
commission has intervened in the lawsuit and is a party to the consent judgment.
B.(1) The commission may, in lieu of meeting all the conditions for recovery set forth in
Paragraphs (1) through (5) of Subsection A, allow the aggrieved party to submit a claim to the
commission by notarized affidavit giving all the pertinent facts to the claim, when the claim is
based on the actions of one or more licensees who have been sanctioned by the commission in
an adjudicatory proceeding, the record of which corroborates the affidavit submitted by the
claimant, and the amount of the claim does not exceed two thousand dollars.
(2) The right to recover under the provisions of this Subsection shall be forever barred unless
application is made within one hundred eighty days from the effective date of the order issued
by the commission pursuant to an adjudicatory proceeding pertaining to a claim submitted by a
notarized affidavit, including appeals.
(3) Claims submitted by notarized affidavit may be paid by the commission after receiving
written approval of the attorney general's office.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1; Acts 1983, No. 379, §1; Acts 1986, No. 836, §1; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1,
eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 1995, No. 1207, §§1, 2; Acts 1997, No. 845, §1; Acts 1999, No. 452, §2;
Acts 2007, No. 35, §1.
§1463. Payment from the fund
A.(1) Any claimant who meets all of the conditions prescribed in this Chapter may apply to the
Louisiana Real Estate Commission to cause payment to be made to such claimant from the
recovery fund, in an amount equal to the unsatisfied portion of the claimant's judgment or 
twenty thousand dollars, whichever is less, and only to the extent and amount reflected in the
judgment as being actual damages.
(2) The commission shall not make any payment, be liable, cast in judgment, or pay any portion
of any claim or judgment representing an award or claim for attorney fees, court costs,
damages for physical or mental injury, medical expenses, loss of income or profits, punitive
damages, or any other type of damages other than the actual damages suffered by the
claimant.
B. Upon receipt by the claimant of the payment from the recovery fund, the claimant shall
assign his additional right, title and interest in the judgment, to the extent of such payment to
the commission and thereupon the commission shall be subrogated to the right, title and
interest of the claimant; and any amount subsequently recovered on the judgment by the
commission, to the extent of the commission's right, title and interest therein, shall be for the
purpose of reimbursing the recovery fund.
C. Payments for claims arising out of the same transaction shall be limited in the aggregate to
twenty thousand dollars regardless of the number of claimants or parcels of real estate
involved in the transaction.
D. Payments for claims based upon judgment against any one licensed real estate broker or real
estate salesperson shall not exceed in the aggregate fifty thousand dollars.
E. If at any time the monies in the recovery fund are insufficient to satisfy any valid claim, or
portion thereof, the commission shall satisfy such unpaid claim or portion thereof as soon as a
sufficient amount of money has been deposited in the fund.
F. All payments and disbursements from the recovery fund shall be made by the commission
upon a voucher signed by the chairman of the commission, or his designee.
G. Upon payment of any amount from the recovery fund in settlement of a claim in satisfaction
of a judgment against a licensed broker or salesperson, the license of such broker or
salesperson shall be automatically revoked. A discharge of bankruptcy shall not relieve a
person from the penalties and disabilities provided in this Section.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1; Acts 1986, No. 836, §1; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts
1995, No. 1207, §1; Acts 1997, No. 845, §1.
§1464. Real Estate Research and Education Fund
A. There is created the Louisiana Real Estate Research and Education Fund. The Louisiana Real
Estate Research and Education Fund, hereinafter referred to as the "education fund", is hereby
established to promote the advancement and more efficient administration of the real estate 
industry and thereby serve to protect the public. Said funds are to be disbursed by voucher
properly drawn and signed by the chairman of the Louisiana Real Estate Commission or his
designee for the purposes hereinafter specified in Subsection C of this Section.
B. In addition to the licensee fees provided for in R.S. 37:1443, the commission may charge,
upon initial issuance or renewal of every real estate broker's and real estate salesperson's
license, as well as any and all other types of licenses, if any issued by the commission after
January 1, 1979, an amount not to exceed ten dollars per annum or twenty dollars for each
two-year license period to be included in the education fund.
C. The commission, in its discretion, may use any and all monies in the education fund from
whatever source derived for the following purposes:
(1) To establish real estate chairs at Louisiana institutions of higher learning.
(2) To contract for particular research projects in the field of real estate for the state of
Louisiana.
(3) To sponsor, conduct, contract for, and to underwrite any and all other research projects or
real estate programs having to do with the advancement of the real estate field in Louisiana.
(4) To reduce the Louisiana Real Estate Commission office building debt for the Fiscal Years
2010-2011 and 2011-2012. This Paragraph shall cease to be effective on June 30, 2012.
Acts 1978, No. 514, §1; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 2010, No. 371, §1, eff. July
1, 2010.
§1465. Real estate franchises

A person, partnership, limited liability company, association, or corporation, foreign or
domestic, acting in the capacity of a franchisor shall not enter into a franchise agreement with a
real estate broker in this state unless the franchisor has appointed a Louisiana licensed real
estate broker to act as its representative in this state.

Added by Acts 1983, No. 381, §1. Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 1995, No. 1207,
§1; Acts 2016, No. 533, §1.
§1466. Errors and omissions insurance; mandatory for all licensees

A. All active licensees licensed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter are mandated
to carry errors and omissions insurance to cover all activities contemplated under this Chapter.

B. The commission shall make the insurance mandated under this Section available to all
licensees by contracting with an insurance provider having a current rating in A.M. Best of A or 
better for a group policy after competitive, sealed bidding and awarding such contract pursuant
to requirements established by the commission. Such issuance and award shall be exempt from
the provisions of Chapters 16 and 17 of Title 39 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950.

C. Any policy obtained by the commission must be available to all licensees with no right on the
part of the insurance provider to cancel any licensee.

D. Licensees shall have the option of obtaining errors and omissions insurance independently,
provided that the coverage contained in such policy complies with the minimum requirements
established by the commission.

E. The commission shall determine the terms and conditions of coverage mandated under this
Section, including but not limited to the minimum limits of coverage, the permissible
deductible, and permissible exemptions.

F. An active licensee that elects to obtain independent errors and omissions insurance shall file
a form verifying that they have independent coverage, as prescribed by the commission, with
the annual license renewal.

G. Active licensees applying for inactive status and those licensees renewing their license while
in an inactive status may do so without the required coverage mandated by this Section.

H. Should the commission be unable to obtain errors and omissions insurance coverage to
insure all licensees who chose to participate in the group insurance program at a reasonable
cost, not to exceed five hundred dollars for coverage, the insurance requirement mandated by
this Section shall be void during the applicable contract year.
Acts 1988, No. 849, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 1989, No. 655, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Acts 1995, No.
1207, §1; Acts 1997, No. 845, §1; Acts 2001, No. 924, §1; Acts 2016, No. 533, §1.
§1467. Agency
A. Licensees shall provide the parties to a real estate transaction with an agency disclosure
informational pamphlet, and where applicable, a dual agency disclosure form as mandated
under R.S. 9:3897.
B. The commission may prescribe such agency disclosure forms or pamphlets as it deems
necessary for the enforcement of this Section.
Acts 1991, No. 354, §1, eff. Jan. 1, 1992; Acts 1997, No. 32, §1.
§1468. Psychologically impacted property
A. The fact or suspicion that a property might be or is psychologically impacted, such impact
being the result of facts or suspicions, including but not limited to:
(1) That an occupant of real property is, or was at any time suspected to be, infected, or has
been infected with Human Immuno-deficiency Virus or diagnosed with Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndrome, or any other disease which has been determined by medical evidence to
be highly unlikely to be transmitted through the occupancy of a dwelling place; or
(2) That the property was, or was at any time suspected to have been, the site of a homicide, or
other felony, or a suicide; is not a material fact or material defect regarding the condition of
real estate that must be disclosed in a real estate transaction.
B. No cause of action shall arise against an owner of real estate or his or her agent for the
failure to disclose to the transferee that the transferred property was psychologically impacted
as defined in Subsection A.
Acts 1991, No. 336, §1.
§1469. Offender notification
A. Every written lease or rental agreement executed by any licensee for residential immovable
property and every written contract for sale of residential immovable property shall contain a
notice of the availability to the public of access to a statewide database disclosing the locations
of individuals required to register pursuant to R.S. 15:540 et seq. The notice shall include the
telephone number and Internet site for the statewide database.
B. Upon delivery of the notice to the lessee or transferee of the residential immovable
property, the lessor, seller, broker, or licensee is not required to provide any information in
addition to that contained in the notice regarding the proximity of registered sex offenders. The
information in the notice shall be deemed to be adequate to inform the lessee or transferee
about the existence of a statewide database of the locations of registered sex offenders and
information from the database regarding those locations. The information in the notice shall
not give rise to any cause of action against the disclosing party by a registered sex offender or
other parties to the transaction.
C. This Section shall apply only to written agreements and contracts that are entered into by
the parties on or after January 1, 2002.
Acts 2001, No. 178, §1.
§1470. Mold informational pamphlet; liability of licensees
A.(1) By April 1, 2004, the commission shall, by rule, in accordance with the Administrative
Procedure Act, approve a mold informational pamphlet, which may be distributed to buyers by
licensees in connection with any real estate transaction entered into on or after July 1, 2004.
(2) If the licensee delivers the mold informational pamphlet to the buyer, he shall do so at or
before the time a lease, rental agreement, or contract for sale is entered into by the parties.
B. If the licensee delivers the mold informational pamphlet to the buyer, the licensee is not
required to provide any additional information concerning mold. The information contained in
the mold informational pamphlet shall be deemed to be adequate to inform the buyer
regarding common mold-related hazards that can affect real property.
C. The licensee shall not be held liable for any error, inaccuracy, or omission of any information
contained in the mold informational pamphlet delivered pursuant to this Section, if either of
the following applies:
(1) The error, inaccuracy, or omission was not within the personal knowledge of the licensee.
(2) The error, inaccuracy, or omission was based on information provided to the licensee by the
commission, a public agency, or by other persons providing relevant information by delivery of
a report or opinion prepared by an expert dealing with matters within the relevant scope of his
professional license, and ordinary care was exercised by the licensee in obtaining and
transmitting such information.
D. Nothing in this Section shall alter or affect the existing disclosure duties of any party to a real
estate transaction, or their agents, including but not limited to the duty of a licensee to disclose
any known material defect regarding the condition of the property.
Acts 2003, No. 1123, §1, eff. July 2, 2003.